AA-427: New aggregated signatures ERC (#9)
eth-infinitism/ERCs: ERCS/erc-4337-agg.md

---
eip:

> description: An account abstraction improvement proposal which enables multiple UserOperations to be authenticated using a single shared signature parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: An ERC-4337 improvement to aggregation of all UserOperation signatures in a bundle
```

title: Signature Aggregation for Account Abstraction
author: Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Yoav Weiss (@yoavw), Dror Tirosh (@drortirosh), Shahaf Nacson (@shahafn), Alex Forshtat (@forshtat), Kristof Gazso (@kristofgazso), Tjaden Hess (@tjade273)
discussions-to:
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created:
requires: 4337, 7562
---

## Abstract

[ERC-4337](./eip-4337) defined a way to achieve Account Abstraction on Ethereum using an alternative `UserOperation` mempool.

However, one big limitation remains:
each transaction must carry its own `signature` or other form of validation input in order to be included.

> We propose an extension to the ERC-4337 that introduces a validation frame that is shared by multiple transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We propose an extension to the ERC-4337 that introduces a new entity, aggregator, that is called during validation, to validate multiple user operations at once.
```

This addition will enable `UserOperations` to support sharing validation inputs, saving gas and guaranteeing atomicity of the bundle.

## Motivation

> Using validation schemes that allow signature aggregation enables significant optimisations and savings on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On rollup networks, the cost of a transaction depends mostly on the calldata size when comitted to L1. Various compression schemes can be applied to UserOperations bundle, but the signature on each UserOp can't be compressed.
Instead, We allow a signature aggregator to aggregate all UserOperation signatures, and thus instead of N signatures, only a single signatures per bundle is required.
```

Author: Can you confirm this is still the case for rollups using EIP-4844 transactions? Even so, I am not sure "comitted to L1" is the right wording in such cases.

* All aggregators MUST be staked.
* The bundler should first verify the aggregator is not throttled or banned according to [ERC-7562](./eip-7562) rules.
* To accept the `UserOperation`, the bundler must call `validateUserOpSignature()` to validate the `UserOperation` signature.
  This method returns an "alternate signature" that should be used during bundling.\
  An "alternative signature" is normally an empty byte array but can also contain some data for the `acccount`.
* The bundler MUST call `validateUserOp` a second time on the account with the `UserOperation` using the
  returned "alternative signature", and make sure it returns the same value.
* Implementations of an `aggregateSignatures()` function must aggregate all UserOp signatures into a single value.
* Note that the above methods are helper methods for the bundler.
  The bundler MAY use a native library to perform the same validation and aggregation logic.
* Implementations of a `validateSignatures()` function MUST verify the aggregated signature's validity
  for all `UserOperations` in the array, and revert otherwise.
  This method is called on-chain by `handleAggregatedOps()`

> ```solidity

Reviewer: AttregatorStakeInfo is returned by simulation.

(however, I'm not sure simulateHandleOps is part of the "protocol" - the ERC, or we can define it only as "implementation")

Author: I only did very minimal changes to the "Specification" part of the aggregation ERC, and "simulations" with state override were never mentioned in the original ERC-4337. Should we?

Reviewer: I think that "simulation" is not a standard, but implementation issue. 
It is a mechanism that is really required only for estimation - which is also not part of the 4337 standard itself.
The reference implementation needs a fix not to use the simulation contract during validation

struct AggregatorStakeInfo {
    address aggregator;
    StakeInfo stakeInfo;
}
```
### Bundling changes

In addition to the steps described in ERC-4337, during bundling the bundler should:

* Sort UserOps by aggregator, to create the lists of UserOps-per-aggregator.

> * For each aggregator, run the aggregator-specific code to create aggregated signature, and update the UserOps.

Reviewer: run aggregateSignatures

> * For each aggregator, run the aggregator-specific code to create aggregated signature, and update the UserOps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For each aggregator, call `aggregateSignatures()` to create aggregated signature, and update the UserOps.
```
